README.md, before:

# stdpopsim

[![Docs](https://readthedocs.org/projects/stdpopsim/badge/?version=latest&style=flat)](https://stdpopsim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)[![Appveyor](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/4ugxq19ql80gcpio?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)[![TravisCI](https://travis-ci.org/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim.svg?branch=main)](https://travis-ci.org/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)


A community-maintained library of standard population genetic simulation models.
Please see the [documentation](https://stdpopsim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for further details.

Click [![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim/main?filepath=stdpopsim_example.ipynb) to start an interactive Jupyter Notebook and start playing with `stdpopsim` now!

If you use ``stdpopsim`` in your work, please cite our
[paper](https://elifesciences.org/articles/54967).
See [here](https://stdpopsim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/introduction.html#citations) for
full citation details.

Commit message:

removed docs for RTD redirect

README.md, after:

**NOTE:** This branch on github (the `rtd_redirect` branch)
is here *without* documentation so that we can redirect away from RTD
and to our github build.

# stdpopsim

(https://stdpopsim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)[![Appveyor](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/4ugxq19ql80gcpio?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)[![TravisCI](https://travis-ci.org/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim.svg?branch=main)](https://travis-ci.org/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim)


A community-maintained library of standard population genetic simulation models.
Please see the [stable documentation](https://popsim-consortium.github.io/stdpopsim-docs/stable/index.html) for further details.
(That's the link to docs for the last stable release,
for in-development docs, see [this link](https://popsim-consortium.github.io/stdpopsim-docs/stable/index.html).)

Click [![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim/main?filepath=stdpopsim_example.ipynb) to start an interactive Jupyter Notebook and start playing with `stdpopsim` now!

If you use ``stdpopsim`` in your work, please cite our
[paper](https://elifesciences.org/articles/54967).
See [here](https://popsim-consortium.github.io/stdpopsim-docs/stable/introduction.html#citations)
for full citation details.
