docs/api.rst, before:

.. _sec_api:

===
API
===

.. _sec_api_species_definitions:

*******************
Species definitions
*******************

The :ref:`Catalog <sec_catalog>` contains a large number of species and simulation
model definitions, which are built using a number of classes defined here.
These are usually not intended to be instantiated directly, but should be
accessed through the main entry point, :func:`.get_species`.

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.get_species

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Species()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Genome()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Chromosome()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Contig()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Citation()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Annotation()
    :members:

******************
Demographic Models
******************

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.DemographicModel()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Population()
    :members:

.. _sec_api_generic_models:

**************
Generic models
**************

The :ref:`Catalog <sec_catalog>` contains simulation models from the literature
that are defined for particular species. It is also useful to be able
to simulate more generic models, which are documented here.
Please see the :ref:`sec_tutorial_generic_models` for examples of using
these models.

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.PiecewiseConstantSize

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.IsolationWithMigration


.. _sec_api_simulation_engines:

******************
Simulation Engines
******************

Support for additional simulation engines can be implemented by subclassing
the abstract :class:`.Engine` class, and registering an instance of the
subclass with :func:`.register_engine`.
These are usually not intended to be instantiated directly, but should be
accessed through the main entry point, :func:`.get_engine`.

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.get_engine

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.get_default_engine

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.register_engine

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Engine()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.engines._MsprimeEngine()
    :show-inheritance:
    :members: id, description, simulate

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.slim_engine._SLiMEngine()
    :show-inheritance:
    :members: id, description, simulate, recap_and_rescale

Commit message:

allow more than one DFE: closes #1072
separate mutation types for each dfe

compare to SLiM metadata

moved mutation type

skip tests that depend on SLiM v3.7

reworking of breaks

docs/api.rst, after:

.. _sec_api:

===
API
===

.. _sec_api_species_definitions:

*******************
Species definitions
*******************

The :ref:`Catalog <sec_catalog>` contains a large number of species and simulation
model definitions, which are built using a number of classes defined here.
These are usually not intended to be instantiated directly, but should be
accessed through the main entry point, :func:`.get_species`.

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.get_species

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Species()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Genome()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Chromosome()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Contig()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Citation()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Annotation()
    :members:

.. _sec_api_demographic_models:

******************
Demographic Models
******************

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.DemographicModel()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Population()
    :members:

.. _sec_api_dfes:

******************
Selection and DFEs
******************

To allow for different kinds of mutations,
each :class:`Contig` carries a list of :class:`.DFE` objects
(for "Distribution of Fitness Effects"),
and a list of collections of intervals to which these apply.
The :class:`Contig` contains the overall mutation rate,
and the :class:`.DFE` describes the proportions of different types of mutations.
Each :class:`.Contig` comes, by default, with a single, neutral DFE
that applies to the entire Contig.


.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.DFE()
    :members:

.. _sec_api_generic_models:

**************
Generic models
**************

The :ref:`Catalog <sec_catalog>` contains simulation models from the literature
that are defined for particular species. It is also useful to be able
to simulate more generic models, which are documented here.
Please see the :ref:`sec_tutorial_generic_models` for examples of using
these models.

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.PiecewiseConstantSize

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.IsolationWithMigration


.. _sec_api_simulation_engines:

******************
Simulation Engines
******************

Support for additional simulation engines can be implemented by subclassing
the abstract :class:`.Engine` class, and registering an instance of the
subclass with :func:`.register_engine`.
These are usually not intended to be instantiated directly, but should be
accessed through the main entry point, :func:`.get_engine`.

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.get_engine

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.get_default_engine

.. autofunction:: stdpopsim.register_engine

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.Engine()
    :members:

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.engines._MsprimeEngine()
    :show-inheritance:
    :members: id, description, simulate

.. autoclass:: stdpopsim.slim_engine._SLiMEngine()
    :show-inheritance:
    :members: id, description, simulate, recap_and_rescale
